(0:00) The future of humanity and the whole world is somewhere between good and bad. It's hard to say more than that. 
(0:08) By good, I mean that the people who came after us, everyone born into this world, could live well and safely.
(0:17) And as long as the Earth can support life, which should be for a very long time, 
(0:23) they could keep living that way. We should at least be thinking about next million years. 
(0:30) On the top of that, the people who came after us could keep living alongside other animals, treating them much better than we do now.
(0:42) Other animals should not have to live in the counter-sphere of us. Many kinds of animals look set to disappear, but some of them could and should keep living beside us. 
(0:55) This kind of future sounds like wonderful, and it is, but I don't think it's just a dream.
(1:04) There is nothing in the Earth itself or in our own bodies to suggest it cannot happen. 
(1:11) By bad, I mean that people could face a very serious problem within the next few hundred years. 
(1:19) Many people dying in wars and from hunger, while most of animals simply vanish, leaving only one of useful to us, chickens, cows, or the ones we cannot get rid of yet, flies and mice.
(1:36) I think it goes without saying that the good future is better than the bad one. 
(1:42) Our future is not entirely in our hands, because the Earth has its own rules. It's part of the solar system and is not a safe place by nature.
(1:54) Other planets in the solar system are impossible to live on. It's either far too hot or far too cold. 
(2:04) Our own planet could, in theory, tip either way, too.
Even a small change in the air around us could make that happen. 
(2:15) The heat deep inside the Earth is useful to living things in many ways, but sometimes melted rock brushes our through volcanoes or the surface. 
(2:28) One of the biggest volcanic eruptions in recent times was Mount St. Helens in the USA.
It threw out a cubic kilometer of ash, luckily in a place where very few people lived there. 
(2:47) In 1815, a volcano called Tambora in Indonesia sent so much ash into the sky that food growing became very difficult all around the world for several years in a row. 
(3:05) Some entire peoples have been wiped out by volcanoes.
But nothing we have seen so far shows that volcanoes can truly do. 
(3:15) Yellowstone National Park in USA sits inside the deep hollow of a very old and very large volcano. Today's measurements show that its center is slowly rising.
(3:29) At some point in the next 200 million years, Yellowstone could erupt again. And when it does, the whole world will be changed. 
(3:40) Yellowstone could erupt tomorrow, but there is a good chance it will give us another million years.
And that is surely enough to be getting on with. 
(3:51) It makes sense to believe that will be the case. Space is dangerous, too. We share the sky with huge numbers of asteroids and now lenses they come close to our planet. 
(4:06) An asteroid the size of a small island hitting Earth at 50,000 km per hour would strike the ocean flood like a rock dropped in a puddle, send a mountain high wave all the way around the world, and push us into a cold age that could last for hundreds of years. 
(4:31) There are plans to stop such things from happening, but in truth, it comes down to luck.
(4:39) On the other hand, no asteroid as destructive as the one that wiped out the dinosaurs 65 million years ago has hit since then. 
(4:51) So, again, there is no reason to disappear right now. The Earth is an uncertain place, but with average luck, it should serve us well enough.
(5:03) If the world becomes unbelievable in the next thousand or million years, it will most likely be our own fault. In short, our future and the future of animals around us is very much in our own hands. 
(5:21) Given average luck with nature and space, the difference between a good future and a bad one will be decided by how we govern ourselves.
Some ways of running the world will help us survive for a long time, others will push us faster towards collapse. 
(5:41) The main point is that we need to look at ourselves and at the world in a new way. Our biggest problems are tied to the living world around us.
We and our leaders need to think about the laws of nature, do that and take it seriously, and if we have a chance, ignore it, neither we nor animals around us have any hope.
(6:10) The End.